A Tale from The Arabian Nights Retold by Laurence Housman


The Sultan Shahriar stands out to fame as the greatest monogamist in
all history. Having been deceived by his first wife, he caused her to
be put to death, and then proceeded to avenge himself upon a thousand
others. Faithful to his monogamic instincts, he married a fresh wife
every day, and on the morning of the next became a widower. Having
thus achieved faith to a thousand dead maidens--all equally beloved
in turn--he may, in his heart of hearts, have found that change, so
doggedly insisted on, did but mean boredom, and so may readily have
welcomed any excuse to relax a performance to which he had bound
himself by many religious oaths.

But, if he had a heart, the old Eastern chronicler has neglected
to tell us what was in it; and at the point where his sacrificial
bridals have become monotonous, the interest of the story shifts from
bridegroom to bride, and Scheherazade, daughter of the Grand Vizier,
witty, courageous, resourceful, and most prolix of all delightful
tale-tellers, adventurously enters the royal menage, and becomes his
only surviving wife.

For Scheherazade, intent on saving the lives of others, brings her
bridesmaid with her, a younger sister named Dinarzade; and when the
morning light comes to tell her that death is near, Dinarzade--prompted
thereto beforehand--stirs in her attendant place at the foot of the
couch, and asks for the sake of old times that one last tale may be
told.

Shahriar, at the bride's humble request, grants permission, and from
that moment is in the toils of the plot which has made his name so
secondary in importance to hers. Scheherazade, 'to do a great right,
does a little wrong': by her entrancing powers of narrative, always
interrupted when the interest of each story is at its height, she
breeds in her tyrant lord infirmity of will, and destroys the only
principle of conduct wherewith he set out to teach woman her place. For
the thousand and one nights which have given their name to the world's
most famous collection of stories, he lives blissfully forsworn,
postponing the execution of his wife to another day; and at the end,
repenting him of his vows, does what we still make our kings do in
England when justice has gone astray, and bestows his 'free pardon'
upon innocence.

The story which is here retold, with many of its life-saving
prolixities omitted, has the distinction of being, according to some
versions, the last of all: it witnesses the accomplishment of the task
which Scheherazade set out to perform. [Pg 4]With the story of Badoura,
the woman of beauty and brain, who, personating her husband, ruled a
Kingdom, and without jealousy provided him at the end of his wanderings
with a second wife--in this story Scheherazade, her great act of
statesmanship concluded, adumbrates what woman set free to use her own
resources can do. And in this reflection of her own great adventurous
self the series concludes. Through a thousand dim dawns, with the
issue still in doubt, she has led the forlorn hope for all the other
women whose lives she would save; and when her tyrant relents, and in
his promise to spare her life spares theirs as well, she kneels and
gratefully kisses his feet.
